Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today it is
part two of our three-part mini-series
on “Young, American Outlaws”.
In case you missed part one, it
was on Ross Ulbricht, the man
who founded the world’s biggest
online drug marketplace, Silk Road.
Next up, part three will be on Luigi
Mangione, the young man who gunned
down the CEO of one of America’s
largest health insurance companies.
And this episode, part two, will
be on a man called Aaron Swartz.
He was one of the most gifted technical
minds of his generation, a founding team
member of the website Reddit and a vocal
advocate for a free and open internet.
In this quest, however, he
got on the wrong side of the
law, and it ended in tragedy.
So, let’s not waste a minute
and get right into it.
If you were going to picture the
scene of a great crime, the campus
at MIT–The Massachusetts Institute
of Technology–might not be the
first thing that comes to mind.
Young men and women studying together,
hunched over laptops, furiously trying to
make a deadline for a paper, their eyes
only remaining open thanks to copious
amounts of energy drinks and coffee.
Yet it was here, or to be precise, in
a utility closet on campus, that one
of the greatest thefts of intellectual
property in history was committed.
Or, if you ask someone else, that a young
man did something that harmed nobody, from
which he made no personal gain, and the
goal of which was to make knowledge freely
available to anyone who wanted to learn.
That criminal, or hero, was Aaron
Swartz, a then 24-year-old computer
programmer and internet activist.
What followed was a two-year battle with
the US Justice Department, a national
debate on censorship, copyright, and
freedom of information, and tragically
ended in Swartz being found dead in his
Brooklyn apartment at the age of 26.
His life was short, but his contributions,
not just to the debate on copyright
but also to the technology and systems
we still use today, were significant.
He was born in 1986, so he was very much
part of the generation that grew up as
the Internet was just getting started.
He was closer to “the action” than most,
as his father worked in technology,
so there was always a computer at
home he could tinker around with.
And from an early age,
he was very interested in
computers and how they worked.
It’s fascinating listening to him
talk about this early period of his
life–the early years of the World Wide
Web–and his hopes and dreams about
what this might become, how it would
democratise access to information, how
anyone from anywhere in the world could
connect with anyone else over shared,
mutual interests, no matter how niche.
He grew up in a small community, and
there were only a handful of people like
him, with the same interests and hobbies.
But on the internet, this growing
magical community, he found
kindred spirits, people who shared
the same interests as he did.
He found his people.
And this wasn’t just a boy posting
messages on forums; he was an active
contributor to the architecture
of the Internet, not just building
websites but also working on the
systems and technologies behind them.
When he was only 12 years old, he built
something called The Info Network,
which was a user-generated encyclopedia.
Wikipedia, essentially, but
3 years before Wikipedia.
Just a few years later, he became a core
contributor to the group that made RSS.
Now, without getting too technical, RSS
is the technology that allows users to
get information in a standardised format.
It’s used for news syndication, it’s
also used for podcasts, and it means that
you can open up a podcast app, subscribe
to different podcasts, and new episodes
automatically appear in your feed.
It’s probably something you’ve never
thought too much about before, but
someone had to envision and create
this standardised feed technology,
and that person, or at least
one of the people in that group,
was a then-teenage Aaron Swartz.
Importantly, this technology
is Open Source; it’s free.
As a publisher, podcaster or user of
RSS, you don’t need to pay RSS.com, the
creators of RSS, or anyone to use it.
It’s free.
Swartz and his fellow contributors behind
RSS believed this technology should
exist; they built it, and they decided it
should be freely accessible to everyone.
So that’s what it is.
These contributions made him something of
a household name in certain programming
circles; he would be invited to speak
at conferences and give interviews, and
people who didn’t know anything about him
would be somewhat surprised when the name
“Aaron Swartz” would be announced and a
15-year-old boy would take to the stage.
But he spoke with great clarity,
he was exceptionally talented, and
was treated as a peer by some of
the most influential people in the
early days of the World Wide Web.
He was accepted at Stanford at the age
of 17, but quickly dropped out, later
saying he was disillusioned with what
he saw as a culture more focused on
status and lifestyle than on learning
At the age of 19, he founded a
start-up called Infogami, which
shortly afterwards merged with
another fledgling site called Reddit.
Reddit, as you probably know, is now
one of the most visited websites in the
world, with hundreds of millions of users
posting, voting, and commenting every day.
It is, essentially, what Aaron Swartz
had always hoped the internet would be,
a place for people to find like-minded
souls and connect over shared interests,
no matter how niche and obscure.
After this merger, he became part of
the small founding team, and when Reddit
was bought by the giant publishing
house Condé Nast in 2006, he suddenly
found himself with seven figures in his
bank account and working inside one of
America’s largest media corporations.
This was not where Aaron
Swartz wanted to be.
He didn’t care about the money or the
prestige of working for a big company.
His lifestyle didn’t change in the
slightest, and this newly minted
millionaire continued to live in
a flatshare, in a bedroom so small
it was referred to as “the closet”.
What he cared about was freedom
of information, the power of the
internet, and the potential for
technology to change society.
Anyone who knew him knew that he
wouldn’t hack it in the corporate
world, and sure enough, he left Condé
Nast after just a year, saying he felt
stifled by the corporate environment.
Afterwards, and now financially free
and not beholden to anyone, he threw
himself into his true passion: activism.
He worked with Creative Commons, the
organisation that allows authors and
artists to license their work freely
so that others can build upon it.
He started groups campaigning
for government transparency
and accountability.
And he became deeply involved in the
debate over copyright law, arguing
that copyright was too restrictive and
unfairly limited access to knowledge.
In 2008, he published what became known
as the “Guerilla Open Access Manifesto”.
In it, he argued that scientists and
researchers had a moral responsibility
to share their work freely, and that
ordinary people should take action
if necessary to liberate information
that was being unjustly restricted.
In his words: “Information is power.
But like all power, there are those
who want to keep it for themselves.
With enough of us, around the world,
we’ll not just send a strong message
opposing the privatization of knowledge
— we’ll make it a thing of the past.”
It was a radical message, and it was one
he would soon try to put into action.
His first target was the millions of
American public court documents that were
not covered by any kind of copyright,
but for which the US government charged
$0.08 per page for users to access.
Swartz believed these should be free,
especially as the court system made a $150
million a year profit from selling them.
He wrote a script that downloaded them
en masse and managed to download 20
million pages of court documents—an
estimated 20% of the total.
His intention was to make them publicly
available, free of charge, because they
were items of public record, after all.
He was caught and questioned by the
FBI, but no charges were pressed.
It would be his first brush with the
law, but unfortunately not the last.
A year later, he set his sights on JSTOR,
which, if you went to university at any
point in the last 20 years or so, you
might remember as one of the largest
digital libraries of academic papers.
JSTOR contains millions of articles
from thousands of journals, covering
virtually every field of knowledge.
Swartz thought it was morally wrong
that these millions of academic papers
and journals, which had often been
funded by taxpayers’ money, were
locked away behind expensive paywalls.
This was…wrong.
Knowledge, he believed, should not be
locked up by governments or corporations.
It should be open and available
to everyone, everywhere.
JSTOR kept the gates closed.
So Swartz set out to
do something about it.
As he put in his earlier manifesto,
“We need to take information,
wherever it is stored, make our
copies and share them with the world”
Using the network at MIT,
he began systematically
downloading articles from JSTOR.
This wasn’t “stealing”, per se; he had
a valid individual JSTOR account via
Harvard, where he was a research fellow.
The difference was that he wasn’t
using his account as it was intended;
he wasn’t downloading single files,
manually going to each one and
clicking “download” with his mouse.
Using similar techniques to those he
had used to download millions of pages
of court documents, he wrote automated
scripts to download millions of
research papers from the JSTOR database.
At first, he used his own laptop,
sitting in campus libraries.
It was fast, but not fast enough.
Eventually, he went so far as to
sneak into a locked utility closet,
where he hid a laptop connected
directly to MIT’s network so it could
download files around the clock.
Over the course of a few weeks, JSTOR
engineers noticed strange activity.
Their servers were being hammered
with download requests, far more
than a normal user would ever make.
They traced it back to MIT, and
eventually to the closet where
Swartz’s laptop was hidden.
The police were called in.
They located the closet
and found the laptop.
But instead of taking the computer
away and trying to find its owner by
hacking into it, they did something
less high-tech but more effective.
They planted a hidden camera, assuming
that they would be able to catch the
perpetrator red-handed, in the act.
And sure enough, shortly afterwards,
Swartz could be plainly seen coming
into the closet and taking the laptop.
Police didn’t arrive in time to
arrest him in the closet, but he
was spotted shortly afterwards, and
in January 2011, he was arrested.
The laptop was seized, and
the FBI soon became involved.
Importantly, he hadn’t yet done
anything with the files he had
downloaded, and he returned them all.
And JSTOR, the supposed victim of the
crime, decided not to press charges.
They quickly settled, and the organisation
even released a public statement saying
it did not wish to see Swartz punished.
And it was assumed that MIT–the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
the home of many a hacker–would be
supportive of Swartz, keen for him to get
off with a slap on the wrist and nothing
more, and would intervene on his behalf.
It did not.
And Swartz found himself up
against the full weight of the
U.S. Department of Justice.
Federal prosecutors stepped in and charged
him with multiple counts of computer fraud
and wire fraud, which carried a maximum
possible sentence of 35 years in prison.
For downloading academic articles.
To many people, not just his
friends and supporters, but people
finding out about Swartz for the
first time, this seemed absurd.
Thirty-five years in prison was the kind
of sentence given to violent criminals–to
armed robbers, murderers, and rapists–not
to a young man who had downloaded
publicly accessible academic journals.
And remember, he hadn’t sold the
files, hadn’t shared or published them,
hadn’t made a cent from any of it.
His goal was ideological, not financial.
He believed that this knowledge should
not be locked away, it should be free for
anyone, anywhere, who wanted to learn.
But prosecutors didn’t see it that way.
They wanted to make an example of him.
In their eyes, he wasn’t
a principled activist.
He was a thief, someone who
had broken into a system to
steal millions of documents.
As the lead federal prosecutor put
it, “Stealing is stealing, whether you
use a computer command or a crowbar.”
A crowbar, by the way, is a metal
bar often used by criminals to
force their way into something.
As the months went on, the pressure grew.
Each time his lawyers tried to
negotiate a deal, prosecutors
pushed for harsher terms.
He faced the possibility of decades in
prison and ruinous financial penalties
unless he pleaded guilty to a felony.
This plea deal would mean
spending six months behind bars.
Still, for someone who was only
24, it was a terrifying prospect.
Pleading guilty would mean admitting
guilt, admitting he had committed a crime.
He would be marked for life as a felon,
something he simply didn’t believe he was.
During all this time, he didn’t stop
his campaign for internet freedom.
In 2012, while his trial was still
looming, he played a central role
in one of the most successful
online protests in history.
That year, the U.S. Congress was
preparing to vote on a law called
SOPA, the Stop Online Piracy Act.
On the surface, it was about
preventing copyright theft.
But in practice, it gave the
government sweeping new powers to
shut down websites, block domain
names, and censor online content.
To Swartz and many others, it was a
direct threat to the open internet.
He co-founded an organisation called
Demand Progress, which mobilised millions
of people online to protest against SOPA.
On 18 January 2012, websites including
Wikipedia, Reddit, and thousands
of others went dark in protest.
The result was extraordinary.
Within days, politicians who had supported
the bill backed down, and SOPA was dead.
He had helped stop what he and
many others believed would have
been the end of the free internet.
He was hailed as a hero by
activists, programmers, and
ordinary internet users alike.
But even as his reputation in
those circles grew, the criminal
case against him dragged on.
The prosecutors didn’t care that
JSTOR had dropped its complaint.
They didn’t care about his
contributions to the public
internet or how well-respected he
was in the programming community.
They cared that he had broken the
law, and they were determined to win.
By early 2013, Swartz was exhausted.
He had struggled with
depression for years.
Friends described him as brilliant
but often fragile, deeply
idealistic but weighed down by the
injustices he saw in the world.
The looming trial magnified these
struggles, these demons he couldn’t shake.
Friends said he was deeply depressed,
worn down by the endless legal
battle and the weight of the
possible sentence hanging over him.
He had spent two years fighting, and
it seemed like there was no way out.
It looked highly likely that he was
going to prison for a long time,
and he was powerless to stop it.
On 11 January 2013, his girlfriend
came back to their Brooklyn apartment
to find him dead, hanging by his belt.
He was 26 years old.
His death sent shockwaves through
the world of technology and beyond.
There was grief, anger, and disbelief.
To many, it seemed like the U.S.
government had hounded a young,
brilliant technologist to his death.
MIT and the Department of Justice
came under heavy criticism.
Why had they pursued the case so
aggressively, especially when the supposed
victim, JSTOR, wanted no part in it?
Why had they refused to offer
a fairer plea deal, one that
didn’t involve prison time?
He was the least violent
person imaginable.
In the aftermath, he became a symbol.
A symbol of the dangers of government
overreach, of the harshness of America’s
criminal justice system, but also
of the potential of the internet to
challenge power and change the world.
His legacy lives on in the technology
he helped build and in the movements
he inspired: the fight for open
access to knowledge, for transparency,
and for a truly free internet.
Yet his story also leaves
us with important, sometimes
uncomfortable, questions.
Should acts of digital civil disobedience
be punished like violent crime?
Is there any moral difference between a
crime committed for personal enrichment
and one committed for the common good?
And what does Aaron Swartz’s death
tell us about the society we live
in, and the price of fighting
for freedom in the digital age?
Depending on how you answer those
questions, there is probably another one.
Was Aaron Swartz a dangerous
criminal or one of the great
martyrs of the Internet age?
OK, then, that is it for
today's episode on Aaron Swartz.
I hope it's been an interesting one
and that you've learnt something new.
As always, I'd love to know what
you thought of this episode.
Had you heard of Aaron Swartz before?
What did you make of this story?
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.